---
layout: post
title: "How Did I Get Here?"
date: 2018-02-24
---
# How Did I Get Here?

The earliest memory I have of my connection to numbers is a photograph from a family camping trip with my easter eggs, all lined up in a row, from smallest to largest and me sitting happily beside them. Apparently that was far more important than things like, you know, eating them...

But my real memories of beginning to love math come from high school. I remember having what I would call 'math instincts,' where I could tell you the answer to the simple algebraic question we were examining but for the life of my could not tell you how I knew it. (I do wonder about the classroom methodologies that seemed to teach that instinct out of me somewhat, and instead required me to learn more about how to lay out my answer according to correct procedures, rather than honing and exploring the natural instinct, but perhaps more on that another day). Grade 10 saw the "perfectly natural" situation of personally responding to the raised hand requests for assistance of my classmates, and for the most part them being accepting of my assistance if I could help them move forward before the teacher was able to get to them. Tutoring students outside of school became my first job, and in senior years, when I was selecting the subjects that counted towards my university entrance, it was straight math/science (and English because it was mandatory) in some regards because by taking them I knew that I knew how to get the grades.

And yet my post-secondary educational pursuits appeared to have little to do with these proficiencies. Since I was about 14, the answer to the questions, "What do you want to be when you grow up?" was, "A pscyhologist," and that's exactly what I studied. And as I discovered, the majority of people DO NOT go into psychology because they wanted anything to do with mathematics. The basic matrix multiplication we were taught to understand some of the functions we were using in our statistics classes, which were just part of my standard math subjects at school, were everything most of my peers wanted NOTHING to do with. But I enjoyed my statistics classes, for the most part found them enjoyable and engaging, loved learning about and conducting research, and completely planned to pursue a PhD at the conclusion of my honours year (Which would have allowed have math and statistics as part of my daily doings for quite some time).

But life, of course, '[is what happens when you're busy making other plans](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beautiful_Boy_(Darling_Boy)#Lyrics),' and I was more than ready to see the other side of education by the time I had finished my undergraduate degree. My [degree](https://future-students.uq.edu.au/study/program/Bachelor-of-Psychological-Science-Honours-2379) assisted me in entering the field that was to become my vocational pursuit for the next 15 years - homelessness. I started working as a Youth Worker, working with homeless youth, some of whom would even age out of our services at 22 before I would (This was definitely information I did not share with them and had created ways to sidestep questions about exactly how old I was with our clients!). And if math had seemed less part of my life while studying psychology, even more so once I began working in the field! Homelesness, as a field, can often have a very practically based focus, respecting hands-on experience (of which I had essentially none), and finding frustration with "ivory tower ideas" of social psychology research and the like. I learnt to shut my mouth before trying to compare the circumstances that I would see in front of me to the lessons gained from the classroom and focus on learning how to help the youth we worked with as best I could.

The twists of life moved me to Canada and I began working as the manager of one of their homeless shelters. And, as is often the case, 'life will out' (via [far more intelligent sources](http://forum.quoteland.com/eve/forums/a/tpc/f/99191541/m/755107215) but for me, the guilty pleasure of Grey's Anatomy). And in my case, when presented with opportunity to make some of my own decisions about how I spent my time, statistics and the analysis of data crept back in. From developing performance standards expectations based on statistics entered by staff on their time spent (not originally required by me, I just leveraged their existence!), to examining the impacts of certain barriers on how long it took our clients to find housing, and thus inform how we managed stays, I found ways to use numbers to help me better understand the world around me. Most people seemed to have limited interest in my numbers, but I got the job done, so I was left alone to get along as made sense to me.

From more front-line experience, my eyes turned to 'the bigger picture,' and I began working at a provincial (aka state) level in homelessness, where my actual job title was 'programs analyst.' From almost the first day, what had seemed almost like a self-indulgent hobby in my previous position, was something that was valued and put to good use. There was the excel spreadsheet to assist with budgeting and projections (that was scrapped almost immediately after it was produced because the IT team decided they could do better), the explanations of why some of the performance measures seemed to suffer from sampling bias and thus reported the statistics in a way that seemed to obscure the true story, and small tasks along the way. (Somewhere in there, over my lunchbreaks, I completed an Intro to Computer Science with a tiny MOOC-offering company called Udacity, and learnt the basics of coding in Python) My favourite accomplishments were budget analysis to encourage better deployment of resources for one of the winter programs, a project that sought to use existing funding to create better service delivery and more housing for those accessing the services, proposals about equitable distribution of funding based on need, and the transition of program performance measurement from monthly emails copy and pasted from excel spreadsheets to the creation of a fully functional in-house dashboard.

Without a doubt I learnt that there was a place for statistics and data analysis within a social services field. But I also learnt a lot about how to get that message out there: How to help numbers about people not just be numbers, but actually be people, or about the means of helping people. To expect my audience to find numbers intimidating, or for them to have very limited interest in how they came to be. To find ways to help those who thought there was no place for numbers in their work to see them as having value, that could help them help, and help better.

And then, in almost full circle, as initially the sole employee of a non-profit whose goal it was to assist local homelessness organizations respond to trends in the area, I found research again. Though this time with quantitative analysis (which I learnt I had previously undervalued), and with a gerontology research department, who were unfortunately initially interested because of the disturbing trend of increasing homelessness among seniors. (Some of our work together is published in the [Journal of Gerontological Social Work](https://www.tandfonline.com/eprint/pyJcGSbI88Db92reiVPS/full))

Throughout this time, a feeling began to grow in me that when it came to this complex problem of homelessness, we had collected so much data, and we were doing (relatively) so little with it. And it would scratch at my brain and make it itchy. And as I sought to build the organization, and as I read more about developments in fields around me, I decided that what we needed was a data scientist. I wasn't yet certain how I would get to hire one, but that was my goal.

But sometimes, instead of waiting for others to create the solution, or find the right person to create the solution, you decide to do it yourself. And that leads me here, to exploring the world of data analysis for myself and seeing where those explorations lead me. Feeling like I am picking up these different threads that have seemed to independently weave through my life and find myself here, at a place where they all seem to collide. My expectations are that the path will be varied, and have unexpected twists and turns, but I am also excited by it, and ready to see where it will take me.
